# The Four Facets of Humanitarian Aid Transparency

Transparency helps fight corruption because it provides the keys to understand: "why, how, what, and how much" [@TransparencyInternational_WhatCorruption_2018]. This report offers a policy proposal for increasing the transparency of humanitarian aid, by building on initiatives already undertaken by the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), who has committed to improving the transparency of information about humanitarian financing [@UNOfficefortheCoordinationofHumanitarian_Improvinghumanitariantransparency_2017]. That commitment was the result of a 'Grand Bargain' made by humanitarian organisations at the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit (WHS) in Istanbul [@AGENDAFORHUMANITY_WorldHumanitarianSummit_2016]. The summit identified the ‘3Ts’ of transparency, namely traceability, totality and timeliness. However, we argue there's a fourth 'T' - trust.

Evidence from the UK suggests that such transparency is necessary. The amount of humanitarian aid given by the UK is a result of the official development assistance (ODA) target of 0.7% of gross national income [@GOV.UK_OfficialDevelopmentAssistance_2018]. In 2015, that amounted to the UK spending £12.1bn [@Morris_RealityCheckHow_2017], a degree of funding that has received much criticism. For example, while giving evidence to a U.S. Senate Committee on foreign relations, ex-UK Prime Minister David Cameron suggested that much of the money goes to corrupt regimes: "If what we do is just have continued programs for countries that sometimes fail year after year after year, we just keep going, maybe that’s not a good use of our money" [@MailOnline_Stripaidmoney_2018]. As we've seen, it is possible to address such criticisms by using transparency tools to reveal the whys, hows, whats and quantities of the UK's aid spending. In other words, transparency would enable the identification of where the money has gone and, thereby, ultimately, help ensure its appropriate use.

The question then is this: how to make humanitarian financing transparent? The WHS identified what they considered to be three facets of transparency:

1. Traceability - the entire transaction chain of the data must be traceable.
2. Totality - the data must be complete and relevant.
3. Timeliness - the data should be up-to-date.

While we agree with the importance of the OCHA’s ‘3Ts’ of transparency, we suggest that trust is important, too; after all, the information reported must be trustworthy. Thus, we propose to meet OCHA's transparency requirements through technology that is well-suited to meeting what we are calling the '4Ts' of transparency. That technology is blockchain, which has inbuilt mechanisms for traceability, totality, timeliness and trust.

We believe the use of blockchains to improve the transparency of humanitarian financing would be novel; while organisations are researching the deployment of the technology to deliver help directly to those in need, there is very little research into how to use blockchains to help improve the transparency of humanitarian aid at all levels. We aim to provide a prototype of just such a blockchain-based system. It will use the same underlying foundations proposed by the Grand Bargain made at the WHS, which committed to the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) and the UN OCHA Financial Tracking Service (FTS) [@UNOfficefortheCoordinationofHumanitarian_Improvinghumanitariantransparency_2017]. By enhancing those initiatives, the software we propose could be used to help further increase the accountability of humanitarian efforts. Ultimately, we hope the prototype software will form the basis of further research and lead to the deployment of a traceable, complete, timely and trustworthy aid reporting system that thereby helps OCHA increase transparency.

## References
