# Abstract

We propose a system that meets the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) commitment to increase the transparency of humanitarian financing. At the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul, humanitarian organisations made a 'Grand Bargain' to publish timely and transparent information about their funding. However, the summit proposed addressing the requirements of that bargain through a financial tracking system that uses a technology that might not be ideally suited to address the ‘3Ts’ of transparency, namely traceability, totality and timeliness. We propose to use a technology that is suited and, furthermore, introduces mechanisms that add a fourth 'T', trust. That technology is blockchains. We believe the use of blockchains in such a manner is novel; while humanitarian organisations are researching the deployment of the technology to deliver aid to those in need, there is very little research into how to use blockchains in helping improve the transparency of humanitarian finance. In this paper, we develop a prototype of just such a blockchain-based system, which OCHA could use to help increase the accountability of humanitarian aid. In developing the prototype, we first describe the problem in detail by investigating the solution offered by the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit. Then we adapt that solution and create a novel application that could help OCHA increase transparency. We hope that the software we propose will form the basis of further research and, ultimately, lead to the deployment of a humanitarian aid reporting system that helps OCHA increase the transparency of humanitarian aid. 
